SECTION I: THOUGHTS ON MIND AND ON STYLE

1. The difference between the mathematical and the intuitive mind.—In the one,
the principles are palpable, but removed from ordinary use; so that for want of
habit it is difficult to turn one's mind in that direction: but if one turns it
thither ever so little, one sees the principles fully, and one must have a
quite inaccurate mind who reasons wrongly from principles so plain that it is
almost impossible they should escape notice.

But in the intuitive mind the principles are found in common use and are before
the eyes of everybody. One has only to look, and no effort is necessary; it is
only a question of good eyesight, but it must be good, for the principles are
so subtle and so numerous that it is almost impossible but that some escape
notice. Now the omission of one principle leads to error; thus one must have
very clear sight to see all the principles and, in the next place, an accurate
mind not to draw false deductions from known principles.

All mathematicians would then be intuitive if they had clear sight, for they do
not reason incorrectly from principles known to them; and intuitive minds would
be mathematical if they could turn their eyes to the principles of mathematics
to which they are unused.

The reason, therefore, that some intuitive minds are not mathematical is that
they cannot at all turn their attention to the principles of mathematics. But
the reason that mathematicians are not intuitive is that they do not see what
is before them, and that, accustomed to the exact and plain principles of
mathematics, and not reasoning till they have well inspected and arranged their
principles, they are lost in matters of intuition where the principles do not
allow of such arrangement. They are scarcely seen; they are felt rather than
seen; there is the greatest difficulty in making them felt by those who do not
of themselves perceive them. These principles are so fine and so numerous that
a very delicate and very clear sense is needed to perceive them, and to judge
rightly and justly when they are perceived, without for the most part being
able to demonstrate them in order as in mathematics, because the principles are
not known to us in the same way, and because it would be an endless matter to
undertake it. We must see the matter at once, at one glance, and not by a
process of reasoning, at least to a certain degree. And thus it is rare that
mathematicians are intuitive and that men of intuition are mathematicians,
because mathematicians wish to treat matters of intuition mathematically and
make themselves ridiculous, wishing to begin with definitions and then with
axioms, which is not the way to proceed in this kind of reasoning. Not that the
mind does not do so, but it does it tacitly, naturally, and without technical
rules; for the expression of it is beyond all men, and only a few can feel it.

Intuitive minds, on the contrary, being thus accustomed to judge at a single
glance, are so astonished when they are presented with propositions of which
they understand nothing, and the way to which is through definitions and axioms
so sterile, and which they are not accustomed to see thus in detail, that they
are repelled and disheartened.

But dull minds are never either intuitive or mathematical.

Mathematicians who are only mathematicians have exact minds, provided all
things are explained to them by means of definitions and axioms; otherwise they
are inaccurate and insufferable, for they are only right when the principles
are quite clear.

And men of intuition who are only intuitive cannot have the patience to reach
to first principles of things speculative and conceptual, which they have never
seen in the world and which are altogether out of the common.

2. There are different kinds of right understanding; some have right
understanding in a certain order of things, and not in others, where they go
astray. Some draw conclusions well from a few premises, and this displays an
acute judgment.

Others draw conclusions well where there are many premises.

For example, the former easily learn hydrostatics, where the premises are few,
but the conclusions are so fine that only the greatest acuteness can reach
them.

And in spite of that these persons would perhaps not be great mathematicians,
because mathematics contain a great number of premises, and there is perhaps a
kind of intellect that can search with ease a few premises to the bottom and
cannot in the least penetrate those matters in which there are many premises.

There are then two kinds of intellect: the one able to penetrate acutely and
deeply into the conclusions of given premises, and this is the precise
intellect; the other able to comprehend a great number of premises without
confusing them, and this is the mathematical intellect. The one has force and
exactness, the other comprehension. Now the one quality can exist without the
other; the intellect can be strong and narrow, and can also be comprehensive
and weak.

3. Those who are accustomed to judge by feeling do not understand the process
of reasoning, for they would understand at first sight and are not used to seek
for principles. And others, on the contrary, who are accustomed to reason from
    principles, do not at all understand matters of feeling, seeking principles
    and being unable to see at a glance.

4. Mathematics, intuition.—True eloquence makes light of eloquence, true
morality makes light of morality; that is to say, the morality of the
judgement, which has no rules, makes light of the morality of the intellect.

For it is to judgement that perception belongs, as science belongs to
intellect. Intuition is the part of judgement, mathematics of intellect.

To make light of philosophy is to be a true philosopher.

5. Those who judge of a work by rule are in regard to others as those who have
a watch are in regard to others. One says, "It is two hours ago"; the other
says, "It is only three-quarters of an hour." I look at my watch, and say to
the one, "You are weary," and to the other, "Time gallops with you"; for it is
only an hour and a half ago, and I laugh at those who tell me that time goes
slowly with me and that I judge by imagination. They do not know that I judge
by my watch.

6. Just as we harm the understanding, we harm the feelings also.

The understanding and the feelings are moulded by intercourse; the
understanding and feelings are corrupted by intercourse. Thus good or bad
society improves or corrupts them. It is, then, all-important to know how to
choose in order to improve and not to corrupt them; and we cannot make this
choice, if they be not already improved and not corrupted. Thus a circle is
formed, and those are fortunate who escape it.

7. The greater intellect one has, the more originality one finds in men.
Ordinary persons find no difference between men.

8. There are many people who listen to a sermon in the same way as they listen
to vespers.

9. When we wish to correct with advantage and to show another that he errs, we
must notice from what side he views the matter, for on that side it is usually
true, and admit that truth to him, but reveal to him the side on which it is
false. He is satisfied with that, for he sees that he was not mistaken and that
he only failed to see all sides. Now, no one is offended at not seeing
everything; but one does not like to be mistaken, and that perhaps arises from
the fact that man naturally cannot see everything, and that naturally he cannot
err in the side he looks at, since the perceptions of our senses are always
true.

10. People are generally better persuaded by the reasons which they have
themselves discovered than by those which have come into the mind of others.

11. All great amusements are dangerous to the Christian life; but among all
those which the world has invented there is none more to be feared than the
theatre. It is a representation of the passions so natural and so delicate that
it excites them and gives birth to them in our hearts, and, above all, to that
of love, principally when it is represented as very chaste and virtuous. For
the more innocent it appears to innocent souls, the more they are likely to be
touched by it. Its violence pleases our self-love, which immediately forms a
desire to produce the same effects which are seen so well represented; and, at
the same time, we make ourselves a conscience founded on the propriety of the
feelings which we see there, by which the fear of pure souls is removed, since
they imagine that it cannot hurt their purity to love with a love which seems
to them so reasonable.

So we depart from the theatre with our heart so filled with all the beauty and
tenderness of love, the soul and the mind so persuaded of its innocence, that
we are quite ready to receive its first impressions, or rather to seek an
opportunity of awakening them in the heart of another, in order that we may
receive the same pleasures and the same sacrifices which we have seen so well
represented in the theatre.

12. Scaramouch, who only thinks of one thing.

The doctor, who speaks for a quarter of an hour after he has said everything,
so full is he of the desire of talking.

13. One likes to see the error, the passion of Cleobuline, because she is
unconscious of it. She would be displeasing, if she were not deceived.

14. When a natural discourse paints a passion or an effect, one feels within
oneself the truth of what one reads, which was there before, although one did
not know it. Hence one is inclined to love him who makes us feel it, for he has
not shown us his own riches, but ours. And thus this benefit renders him
pleasing to us, besides that such community of intellect as we have with him
necessarily inclines the heart to love.

15. Eloquence, which persuades by sweetness, not by authority; as a tyrant, not
as a king.

16. Eloquence is an art of saying things in such a way (1) that those to whom
we speak may listen to them without pain and with pleasure; (2) that they feel
themselves interested, so that self-love leads them more willingly to
reflection upon it.

It consists, then, in a correspondence which we seek to establish between the
head and the heart of those to whom we speak, on the one hand, and, on the
other, between the thoughts and the expressions which we employ. This assumes
that we have studied well the heart of man so as to know all its powers and,
then, to find the just proportions of the discourse which we wish to adapt to
them. We must put ourselves in the place of those who are to hear us, and make
trial on our own heart of the turn which we give to our discourse in order to
see whether one is made for the other, and whether we can assure ourselves that
the hearer will be, as it were, forced to surrender. We ought to restrict
ourselves, so far as possible, to the simple and natural, and not to magnify
that which is little, or belittle that which is great. It is not enough that a
thing be beautiful; it must be suitable to the subject, and there must be in it
nothing of excess or defect.

17. Rivers are roads which move, and which carry us whither we desire to go.

18. When we do not know the truth of a thing, it is of advantage that there
should exist a common error which determines the mind of man, as, for example,
the moon, to which is attributed the change of seasons, the progress of
diseases, etc. For the chief malady of man is restless curiosity about things
which he cannot understand; and it is not so bad for him to be in error as to
be curious to no purpose.

The manner in which Epictetus, Montaigne, and Salomon de Tultie wrote is the
most usual, the most suggestive, the most remembered, and the oftenest quoted,
because it is entirely composed of thoughts born from the common talk of life.
As when we speak of the common error which exists among men that the moon is
the cause of everything, we never fail to say that Salomon de Tultie says that,
when we do not know the truth of a thing, it is of advantage that there should
exist a common error, etc.; which is the thought above.

19. The last thing one settles in writing a book is what one should put in
first.

20. Order.—Why should I undertake to divide my virtues into four rather than
into six? Why should I rather establish virtue in four, in two, in one? Why
into Abstine et sustine 1 rather than into "Follow Nature," or, "Conduct your
private affairs without injustice," as Plato, or anything else? But there, you
will say, everything is contained in one word. Yes, but it is useless without
explanation, and when we come to explain it, as soon as we unfold this maxim
which contains all the rest, they emerge in that first confusion which you
desired to avoid. So, when they are all included in one, they are hidden and
useless, as in a chest, and never appear save in their natural confusion.
Nature has established them all without including one in the other.

21. Nature has made all her truths independent of one another. Our art makes
one dependent on the other. But this is not natural. Each keeps its own place.

22. Let no one say that I have said nothing new; the arrangement of the subject
is new. When we play tennis, we both play with the same ball, but one of us
places it better.

I had as soon it said that I used words employed before. And in the same way if
the same thoughts in a different arrangement do not form a different discourse,
no more do the same words in their different arrangement form different
thoughts!

23. Words differently arranged have a different meaning, and meanings
differently arranged have different effects.

24. Language.—We should not turn the mind from one thing to another, except for
relaxation, and that when it is necessary and the time suitable, and not
otherwise. For he that relaxes out of season wearies, and he who wearies us out
of season makes us languid, since we turn quite away. So much does our perverse
lust like to do the contrary of what those wish to obtain from us without
giving us pleasure, the coin for which we will do whatever is wanted.

25. Eloquence.—It requires the pleasant and the real; but the pleasant must
itself be drawn from the true.

26. Eloquence is a painting of thought; and thus those who, after having
painted it, add something more, make a picture instead of a portrait.

27. Miscellaneous. Language.—Those who make antitheses by forcing words are
like those who make false windows for symmetry. Their rule is not to speak
accurately, but to make apt figures of speech.

28. Symmetry is what we see at a glance; based on the fact that there is no
reason for any difference, and based also on the face of man; whence it happens
that symmetry is only wanted in breadth, not in height or depth.

29. When we see a natural style, we are astonished and delighted; for we
expected to see an author, and we find a man. Whereas those who have good
taste, and who, seeing a book, expect to find a man, are quite surprised to
find an author. Plus poetice quam humane locutus es. 2 Those honour Nature well
who teach that she can speak on everything, even on theology.

30. We only consult the ear because the heart is wanting. The rule is
uprightness.

Beauty of omission, of judgement.

31. All the false beauties which we blame in Cicero have their admirers, and in
great number.

32. There is a certain standard of grace and beauty which consists in a certain
relation between our nature, such as it is, weak or strong, and the thing which
pleases us.

Whatever is formed according to this standard pleases us, be it house, song,
discourse, verse, prose, woman, birds, rivers, trees, rooms, dress, etc.
Whatever is not made according to this standard displeases those who have good
taste.

And as there is a perfect relation between a song and a house which are made
after a good model, because they are like this good model, though each after
its kind; even so there is a perfect relation between things made after a bad
model. Not that the bad model is unique, for there are many; but each bad
sonnet, for example, on whatever false model it is formed, is just like a woman
dressed after that model.

Nothing makes us understand better the ridiculousness of a false sonnet than to
consider nature and the standard and, then, to imagine a woman or a house made
according to that standard.

33. Poetical beauty.—As we speak of poetical beauty, so ought we to speak of
mathematical beauty and medical beauty. But we do not do so; and the reason is
that we know well what is the object of mathematics, and that it consists in
proofs, and what is the object of medicine, and that it consists in healing.
But we do not know in what grace consists, which is the object of poetry. We do
not know the natural model which we ought to imitate; and through lack of this
knowledge, we have coined fantastic terms, "The golden age," "The wonder of our
times," "Fatal," etc., and call this jargon poetical beauty.

But whoever imagines a woman after this model, which consists in saying little
things in big words, will see a pretty girl adorned with mirrors and chains, at
whom he will smile; because we know better wherein consists the charm of woman
than the charm of verse. But those who are ignorant would admire her in this
dress, and there are many villages in which she would be taken for the queen;
hence we call sonnets made after this model "Village Queens."

34. No one passes in the world as skilled in verse unless he has put up the
sign of a poet, a mathematician, etc. But educated people do not want a sign
and draw little distinction between the trade of a poet and that of an
embroiderer.

People of education are not called poets or mathematicians, etc.; but they are
all these and judges of all these. No one guesses what they are. When they come
into society, they talk on matters about which the rest are talking. We do not
observe in them one quality rather than another, save when they have to make
use of it. But then we remember it, for it is characteristic of such persons
that we do not say of them that they are fine speakers, when it is not a
question of oratory, and that we say of them that they are fine speakers, when
it is such a question.

It is therefore false praise to give a man when we say of him, on his entry,
that he is a very clever poet; and it is a bad sign when a man is not asked to
give his judgement on some verses.

35. We should not be able to say of a man, "He is a mathematician," or "a
preacher," or "eloquent"; but that he is "a gentleman." That universal quality
alone pleases me. It is a bad sign when, on seeing a person, you remember his
book. I would prefer you to see no quality till you meet it and have occasion
to use it (Ne quid minis), 3 for fear some one quality prevail and designate
the man. Let none think him a fine speaker, unless oratory be in question, and
then let them think it.

36. Man is full of wants: he loves only those who can satisfy them all. "This
one is a good mathematician," one will say. But I have nothing to do with
mathematics; he would take me for a proposition. "That one is a good soldier."
He would take me for a besieged town. I need, then, an upright man who can
accommodate himself generally to all my wants.

37. Since we cannot be universal and know all that is to be known of
everything, we ought to know a little about everything. For it is far better to
know something about everything than to know all about one thing. This
universality is the best. If we can have both, still better; but if we must
choose, we ought to choose the former. And the world feels this and does so;
for the world is often a good judge.

38. A poet and not an honest man.

39. If lightning fell on low places, etc., poets, and those who can only reason
about things of that kind, would lack proofs.

40. If we wished to prove the examples which we take to prove other things, we
should have to take those other things to be examples; for, as we always
believe the difficulty is in what we wish to prove, we find the examples
clearer and a help to demonstration.

Thus, when we wish to demonstrate a general theorem, we must give the rule as
applied to a particular case; but if we wish to demonstrate a particular case,
we must begin with the general rule. For we always find the thing obscure which
we wish to prove and that clear which we use for the proof; for, when a thing
is put forward to be proved, we first fill ourselves with the imagination that
it is, therefore, obscure and, on the contrary, that what is to prove it is
clear, and so we understand it easily.

41. Epigrams of Martial.—Man loves malice, but not against one-eyed men nor the
unfortunate, but against the fortunate and proud. People are mistaken in
thinking otherwise.

For lust is the source of all our actions, and humanity, etc. We must please
those who have humane and tender feelings. That epigram about two one-eyed
people is worthless, for it does not console them and only gives a point to the
author's glory. All that is only for the sake of the author is worthless.
Ambitiosa recident ornamenta. 4

42. To call a king "Prince" is pleasing, because it diminishes his rank.

43. Certain authors, speaking of their works, say: "My book," "My commentary,"
"My history," etc. They resemble middle-class people who have a house of their
own and always have "My house" on their tongue. They would do better to say:
"Our book," "Our commentary," "Our history," etc., because there is in them
usually more of other people's than their own.

44. Do you wish people to believe good of you? Don't speak.

45. Languages are ciphers, wherein letters are not changed into letters, but
words into words, so that an unknown language is decipherable.

46. A maker of witticisms, a bad character.

47. There are some who speak well and write badly. For the place and the
audience warm them, and draw from their minds more than they think of without
that warmth.

48. When we find words repeated in a discourse and, in trying to correct them,
discover that they are so appropriate that we would spoil the discourse, we
must leave them alone. This is the test; and our attempt is the work of envy,
which is blind, and does not see that repetition is not in this place a fault;
for there is no general rule.

49. To mask nature and disguise her. No more king, pope, bishop—but august
monarch, etc.; not Paris—the capital of the kingdom. There are places in which
we ought to call Paris, "Paris," others in which we ought to call it the
capital of the kingdom.

50. The same meaning changes with the words which express it. Meanings receive
their dignity from words instead of giving it to them. Examples should be
sought....

51. Sceptic, for obstinate.

52. No one calls another a Cartesian but he who is one himself, a pedant but a
pedant, a provincial but a provincial; and I would wager it was the printer who
put it on the title of Letters to a Provincial.

53. A carriage upset or overturned, according to the meaning. To spread abroad
or upset, according to the meaning. (The argument by force of M. le Maitre over
the friar.)

54. Miscellaneous.—A form of speech, "I should have liked to apply myself to
that."

55. The aperitive virtue of a key, the attractive virtue of a hook.

56. To guess: "The part that I take in your trouble." The Cardinal did not want
to be guessed.

"My mind is disquieted." I am disquieted is better.

57. I always feel uncomfortable under such compliments as these: "I have given
you a great deal of trouble," "I am afraid I am boring you," "I fear this is
too long." We either carry our audience with us, or irritate them.

58. You are ungraceful: "Excuse me, pray." Without that excuse I would not have
known there was anything amiss. "With reverence be it spoken..." The only thing
bad is their excuse.

59. "To extinguish the torch of sedition"; too luxuriant. "The restlessness of
his genius"; two superfluous grand words.
